README.md, before:

# @codingame/monaco-vscode-api &middot; [![monthly downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api) [![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api) [![PRs welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/codingame/monaco-vscode-api/pulls)

[NPM module](https://www.npmjs.com/) that implements the VSCode api and redirects calls to Monaco editor.

The VSCode api is composed of:

- A lot of classes and tools, which are exported the same way as in VSCode.
- Some features that are supported by Monaco (Language feature registrations...) which are just forwarded to it (with some transformations)
- Some features that are not supported by Monaco, and in such case:
  - If it's an important feature: we let the user implement it as they wish.
  - If it's some advanced features that don't make a lot of sense on Monaco (debug, tests...), it just throws an error when you try to use it.


To implement by hands the optional features (file system, workspace folders, file...), you can use the `Services` namespace from `vscode/services`:
```typescript
import { Services } from 'vscode/services'
Services.install({
  workspace: {
    workspaceFolders: ...,
    createFileSystemWatcher (documentSelector, provider) {
      ...
    },
    onDidSaveTextDocument
  },
  window: {
    withProgress: ...
  }
})
```

## Monaco standalone services

Also, monaco-editor use `standalone` versions or the vscode services, which are much simpler.

You may want to provide your custom implementations of them, especially for: `textModelService`, `codeEditorService` and `notificationService`. To do so, you can provide them as the third parameter while creating your first editor.
This library allows you to use a more convenient way using `StandaloneService.initialize`.
Also, monaco-editor doesn't provide good type for them, so this library does it.

Example:
```typescript
import { StandaloneService, INotificationService } from 'vscode/services'

class MyCustomNotificationService implements INotificationService { ... }
StandaloneService.initialize({
  get [INotificationService.toString()] () {
    return new MyCustomNotificationService(...)
  }
})
```

Additionally, this library exposes 3 modules that include the vscode version of some services (with some glue to make it work with monaco):
- Notification / Dialog: `vscode/service-override/messages`
- Model / Editor: `vscode/service-override/modelEditor`
- Configuration: `vscode/service-override/configuration`

Usage:
```typescript
import { StandaloneService } from 'vscode/services'
import getModelEditorServiceOverride from 'vscode/service-override/modelEditor'
import getMessageServiceOverride from 'vscode/service-override/messages'
import getConfigurationServiceOverride from 'vscode/service-override/configuration'

StandaloneServices.initialize({
  ...getModelEditorServiceOverride((model, input, sideBySide) => {
    // Open a new editor here and return it
    // It will be called when for instance the user ctrl+click on an import
  }),
  ...getMessageServiceOverride(document.body),
  ...getConfigurationServiceOverride(() => userConfigurationJson, configurationChangeEvent)
})
```

Note: using `vscode/service-override/modelEditor`, you'll be able to use the `vscode.workspace.registerTextDocumentContentProvider` api

### Troubleshoot

`StandaloneServices.initialize` can only be called once (note that `monaco.editor.create` calls `StandaloneServices.initialize`).

Also, a service that is used cannot be overriden anymore. So `StandaloneServices.initialize` should be called as soon as possible to prevent most of the issues.
### Installation

```bash
npm install vscode@npm:@codingame/monaco-vscode-api
npm install -D @types/vscode
```

### Usage

Just import it as if you were in a vscode extension:

```typescript
import * as vscode from 'vscode'

const range = new vscode.Range(...)
vscode.languages.registerCompletionItemProvider(...)
```

### History

This project was mainly created to make the implementation of [monaco-languageclient](https://github.com/TypeFox/monaco-languageclient) more robust and maintainable.

monaco-languageclient uses [vscode-languageclient](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vscode-languageclient) which was built to run inside a VSCode extension. VSCode extensions communicate with the editor via an [API](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/vscode) they can import into their code.

[The VSCode api](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/vscode-api) exports:
- Some functions to interact with the IDE ([language feature registrations](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/vscode-api#languages), [command execution](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/vscode-api#commands)...)
- A lot of utility classes (Range, Position...)

The first implementations of [monaco-languageclient](https://github.com/TypeFox/monaco-languageclient) were using a fake VSCode api implementation. The vscode-languageclient was hacked so the VSCode<->protocol object converters were mainly bypassed, so the fake VSCode api was receiving [Language Server Protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/) objects. Then the objects were transformed using custom transformers into [Monaco](https://www.npmjs.com/package/monaco-editor) objects to communicate with the monaco api.

This approach has some disadvantages:
- There is a lot of code to transform LSP objects into Monaco objects
- It's hard to follow the updates of VSCode and the language server protocol
- It doesn't behave exactly the same as in VSCode

With this library, it would be possible to plug vscode-languageclient directly on top of monaco, monaco-languageclient still helps to do so by:
- Adding some tweaks to the VSCode LanguageClient (Removing unsupported features...)
- Providing a default implementations of the required fallback services (`vscode/services`)
- Providing some examples on how to build an app using it
- Adding some tools (DisposableCollection)

Commit message:

doc: Add editor configuration section

README.md, after:

# @codingame/monaco-vscode-api &middot; [![monthly downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api) [![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@codingame/monaco-vscode-api) [![PRs welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/codingame/monaco-vscode-api/pulls)

[NPM module](https://www.npmjs.com/) that implements the VSCode api and redirects calls to Monaco editor.

The VSCode api is composed of:

- A lot of classes and tools, which are exported the same way as in VSCode.
- Some features that are supported by Monaco (Language feature registrations...) which are just forwarded to it (with some transformations)
- Some features that are not supported by Monaco, and in such case:
  - If it's an important feature: we let the user implement it as they wish.
  - If it's some advanced features that don't make a lot of sense on Monaco (debug, tests...), it just throws an error when you try to use it.


To implement by hands the optional features (file system, workspace folders, file...), you can use the `Services` namespace from `vscode/services`:
```typescript
import { Services } from 'vscode/services'
Services.install({
  workspace: {
    workspaceFolders: ...,
    createFileSystemWatcher (documentSelector, provider) {
      ...
    },
    onDidSaveTextDocument
  },
  window: {
    withProgress: ...
  }
})
```

## Monaco standalone services

Also, monaco-editor use `standalone` versions or the vscode services, which are much simpler.

You may want to provide your custom implementations of them, especially for: `textModelService`, `codeEditorService` and `notificationService`. To do so, you can provide them as the third parameter while creating your first editor.
This library allows you to use a more convenient way using `StandaloneService.initialize`.
Also, monaco-editor doesn't provide good type for them, so this library does it.

Example:
```typescript
import { StandaloneService, INotificationService } from 'vscode/services'

class MyCustomNotificationService implements INotificationService { ... }
StandaloneService.initialize({
  get [INotificationService.toString()] () {
    return new MyCustomNotificationService(...)
  }
})
```

Additionally, this library exposes 3 modules that include the vscode version of some services (with some glue to make it work with monaco):
- Notification / Dialog: `vscode/service-override/messages`
- Model / Editor: `vscode/service-override/modelEditor`
- Configuration: `vscode/service-override/configuration`

Usage:
```typescript
import { StandaloneService } from 'vscode/services'
import getModelEditorServiceOverride from 'vscode/service-override/modelEditor'
import getMessageServiceOverride from 'vscode/service-override/messages'
import getConfigurationServiceOverride from 'vscode/service-override/configuration'

StandaloneServices.initialize({
  ...getModelEditorServiceOverride((model, input, sideBySide) => {
    // Open a new editor here and return it
    // It will be called when for instance the user ctrl+click on an import
  }),
  ...getMessageServiceOverride(document.body),
  ...getConfigurationServiceOverride(() => userConfigurationJson, configurationChangeEvent)
})
```

Note: using `vscode/service-override/modelEditor`, you'll be able to use the `vscode.workspace.registerTextDocumentContentProvider` api

### Troubleshoot

`StandaloneServices.initialize` can only be called once (note that `monaco.editor.create` calls `StandaloneServices.initialize`).

Also, a service that is used cannot be overriden anymore. So `StandaloneServices.initialize` should be called as soon as possible to prevent most of the issues.

## Editor configuration

The editors created using `monaco.editor.create` don't use the configuration from the configurationService.

This library exposes functions to create editors binded on the configuration:

before:
```typescript
import * as monaco from 'monaco-editor'
monaco.editor.create(...)
```

after:
```typescript
import { createConfiguredEditor } from 'vscode/monaco'

createConfiguredEditor(...)
```

`createConfiguredEditor` returns a subclass of what is returned by `monaco.editor.create`, the `updateOptions` method can still be used.
The only difference is that is will use the `configurationService` as a default configuration

### Installation

```bash
npm install vscode@npm:@codingame/monaco-vscode-api
npm install -D @types/vscode
```

### Usage

Just import it as if you were in a vscode extension:

```typescript
import * as vscode from 'vscode'

const range = new vscode.Range(...)
vscode.languages.registerCompletionItemProvider(...)
```

### History

This project was mainly created to make the implementation of [monaco-languageclient](https://github.com/TypeFox/monaco-languageclient) more robust and maintainable.

monaco-languageclient uses [vscode-languageclient](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vscode-languageclient) which was built to run inside a VSCode extension. VSCode extensions communicate with the editor via an [API](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/vscode) they can import into their code.

[The VSCode api](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/vscode-api) exports:
- Some functions to interact with the IDE ([language feature registrations](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/vscode-api#languages), [command execution](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/references/vscode-api#commands)...)
- A lot of utility classes (Range, Position...)

The first implementations of [monaco-languageclient](https://github.com/TypeFox/monaco-languageclient) were using a fake VSCode api implementation. The vscode-languageclient was hacked so the VSCode<->protocol object converters were mainly bypassed, so the fake VSCode api was receiving [Language Server Protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/) objects. Then the objects were transformed using custom transformers into [Monaco](https://www.npmjs.com/package/monaco-editor) objects to communicate with the monaco api.

This approach has some disadvantages:
- There is a lot of code to transform LSP objects into Monaco objects
- It's hard to follow the updates of VSCode and the language server protocol
- It doesn't behave exactly the same as in VSCode

With this library, it would be possible to plug vscode-languageclient directly on top of monaco, monaco-languageclient still helps to do so by:
- Adding some tweaks to the VSCode LanguageClient (Removing unsupported features...)
- Providing a default implementations of the required fallback services (`vscode/services`)
- Providing some examples on how to build an app using it
- Adding some tools (DisposableCollection)
